Between the new administration in
Washington, the rise of AI, and the wars
in Gaza and Ukraine, news headlines in
2025 have been clogged with just a few
huge persistent stories. But, plenty
more was going on hidden behind the
headlines. So, today, for our last video
of the year, we're going to cover one
piece of news from each of the 193 UN
member states, starting here in the
Middle East.
Saudi Arabia sent a $368 million aid
package to Yemen, a sum meant to build
financial stability and pay for aid as
Yemen continues to struggle through a
now decade-long war, perpetuating one of
the worst humanitarian crises on the
planet. In 2014, an Iran-backed rebel
group of Houthis overthrew the
government, and the Saudis led an
opposition coalition since they viewed
the conflict as a proxy fight with Iran.
This year's a large contribution to
Yemen demonstrates their continued
commitment to that fight. Like all
oil-producing countries along the
Persian Gulf, Oman's authoritarian
structure allowed the ruling party to
reap disproportionate financial benefits
from fossil fuel sales and distribute
profits less evenly in the form of
subsidies to its residents. But, as the
future of oil becomes less stable and
countries look to diversify revenue, one
of the options is taxation. Oman became
the first country in this area to
institute an income tax this year, and
though it's just 5% and applies only to
those making more than $109,000 a year,
the country's neighbors are closely
watching, wondering if authoritarianism
can survive taxation.
The United Arab Emirates is also looking
to diversify, and a newer core part of
that strategy centers around pouring
money into AI. The UAE signed an
agreement with the United States to
build the world's largest AI data center
outside of America, potentially giving
it access to more than a half million
Nvidia chips. The Emirates has been
uniquely successful in its balancing act
of striking AI-related deals with the
US, a key strategic ally, while also
working deeply with China, its largest
trading partner. American officials had
previously imposed export controls on
advanced technology like Nvidia GPUs to
the UAE due to its relationship with
China, but this new deal for a
10-square-mile campus in Abu Dhabi marks
a reversal of that status quo.
Another way that Middle Eastern
countries are looking to diversify their
economies and grow more integrated with
the rest of the wealthy world is by
hosting global events. That's true for
Qatar, which announced that in 2026 it
will become the first Gulf country to
host Art Basel, the world's largest
modern and contemporary art fair.
Bahrain, which continues to host Formula
1 races, gaining a contract extension
through 2036 despite opposition in
recent years surrounding accusations of
human rights violations. And Saudi
Arabia, well-known for sports washing,
which was selected to host the FIFA
World Cup in 2034, even though
organizations such as Amnesty
International spoke out against the
selection. Also looking to diversify its
economy, Kuwait welcomed the addition of
a third runway at its international
airport. A new control tower was also
erected as part of the nation's
initiative to broaden its influence on
the regional map, expanding its
potential for increased passenger
traffic and laying the groundwork to
position itself as a major hub similar
to Doha, Abu Dhabi, and Dubai.
Iraq experienced one of the worst
sandstorms in its history, shutting two
of its airports and sending several
thousand people to the hospital. The
country is no stranger to the weather
event, which reduces visibility to less
than a half mile and permeates people's
homes through even the smallest seams.
But, as climate change worsens, Iraq is
listed as one of the United Nations'
most vulnerable countries to its
effects, and storms like this will
become more common and severe.
Moving west, several countries in this
region sit at a nexus of conflict in
2025. Jordan, on the border of Israel,
is engaged by proximity to its
neighboring countries' war, and is
dealing with the repercussions in its
own way, including banning Jordan's
chapter of the Muslim Brotherhood. The
political Islamist group has
representation in government, winning 31
out of the 138 available seats, but
Jordan has long been wary of its rise
because the Brotherhood is seen as an
ally of Hamas. The ban was in response
to the arrest of 16 of its members who
were training militants and plotting
strikes within Jordan. Jordan has been
critical of the war in Gaza, and yet, in
a balancing act familiar to many in the
region, it maintains a long-standing
peace treaty with Israel. In Israel,
despite a shaky ceasefire, the country's
military campaign in Gaza has remained
central in the country's politics this
year. But, unlike in Gaza, regular life
and business in the country has
continued as well, and an action by
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's
government turned some heads. In 2023,
he started a judicial overhaul that was
paused after the war started that
October, but this year it was revived
when Israel's parliament passed a law
that would give the government more
power in appointing judges. Some see it
as a power grab by Netanyahu's far-right
government, but he argues it simply
gives power back to elected officials
that had been taken away.
More than 10,000 United Nations
peacekeepers have been stationed on
Israel's border with Lebanon for a
quarter century to manage the volatile
region where Iranian-backed Hezbollah
continues to have a presence. But, that
will change as the UN Security Council
voted to have the peacekeepers withdraw
over the next year, giving autonomy to
the Lebanese to control their southern
border. Although the withdrawal could be
seen to represent increasing stability
in the region, it's more so that the
peacekeepers' mission has become
obsolete. Both sides view them
critically as Hezbollah considers them
sympathetic to Israel, while Israel sees
them as ineffective [music] since they
cannot use force unless fired upon.
In a step towards restoring a country
from turmoil, Syria held its first
parliamentary elections since the fall
of ruler Bashar al-Assad in 2024, who
led the country for more than a decade
and held what most considered sham
elections to keep hold to power. While
2025's were not fully free and fair, the
fact that they happened in two-thirds of
districts brings some power back to the
people and their ability to choose
representation, marking an important
step towards the goal of true popular
vote democratic elections later on. This
resource-rich region continues to search
for more natural gas and oil reserves as
demand spikes while Europe steers away
from dependence on Russia. Another
natural gas field was found 118 miles or
190 km south of Cyprus in its exclusive
economic zone, helping to further that
goal. The deposit, discovered by a
consortium including ExxonMobil and
Qatar Energy International, is the sixth
natural gas field to be discovered in
the zone in the past 15 years.
Political unrest continues in Turkey,
where Istanbul's mayor, Ekrem İmamoğlu,
remains behind bars on accusations of
corruption and espionage. İmamoğlu is
widely seen as President Erdoğan's
biggest political rival. Under Erdoğan's
rule, Turkey has grown increasingly
authoritarian, and the charges against
İmamoğlu, for many, represent just one
more step in that direction as they're
viewed as a means to silence Erdoğan's
largest opposition.
Tensions, however, between Armenia and
Azerbaijan seem to be quieting as a
peace deal between the countries was
signed in August. The neighbors have
been fighting over the Nagorno-Karabakh
region since the end of the Cold War,
and the 17-page treaty, months in the
making, outlines set protocols for
bringing some stability to the disputed
lands.
The former Soviet state of Georgia was
home to several nuclear sites during
those unified years in the '80s, and
even today, uranium remains in the
country. But, this year, a group of
Chinese nationals attempted to purchase
some of it, 4.4 lb or 2 kg for $400,000,
but their efforts were thwarted when
police swarmed their car with two glass
jars of the substance in the trunk. The
arrest signifies a larger issue in that
even though it's illegal to sell and
transport uranium, which can be enriched
for nuclear weapons, the lack of control
over the country's remaining supply of
the compound makes it a viable black
market source for the extremely
dangerous material.
In Iran, aging water storage and
transport infrastructure is exacerbating
a years-long drought that peaked in July
when temperatures reached 125°
Fahrenheit or 52° Celsius. Residents in
the capital of Tehran were asked to
limit water consumption due to the
country's dwindling reservoirs as
officials looked to neighboring
countries to import water and
additionally instituted power cuts to
deal with the heat wave, all signs of
the warming planet's effects on daily
life.
Five Central Asian countries,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan, met for
their first summit with the European
Union to address trade,
counterterrorism, climate, and energy
independence. The region's ties to
Europe have become more critical since
the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and
these countries are looking to diversify
their economies and geopolitical
strategies. One of the major projects to
progress these goals is a trans-Caspian
transport corridor, which connects China
to Europe while bypassing Russia and
eliminating ship transport through the
Suez Canal. The region's shifting
alliances and jockeying for mineral
rights, part of Europe's interest in the
region, are also shadowed by human
rights concerns, which was a main topic
for the summit in ensuring that
quick-paced development considers
residents and their environment.
Mongolia typically makes news for its
vast and wild lands, home to nomadic
tribes, [music] but this year an
unusually public political controversy
played out when the country's prime
minister, Zendashatar Gombojav, was
ousted in a vote by the country's ruling
Mongolian People's Party after just 4
[music] months in charge. The internal
struggle boiled up between Gombojav and
the leader of the opposition party,
Amarbayasgalan Dashdorj. Gombojav lost a
party leadership election to him, and
accusations about corruption flew
between the two. It left the country in
disarray ahead of budgeting at a time
when teachers and doctors were striking
for higher wages.
China released its latest five-year
strategic plan, a hugely important
guiding policy document, [music] and
this edition was all about increasing
its autonomy. The plans call for chip
independence in a direct response to its
ongoing chip war with the United States,
where the Asian nation is catching up to
historical American dominance in the
field. Additionally, as America pulls
back its own scientific funding and
research, China plans to continue to
invest and keep its title as the world's
biggest R&D spender to the tune of $505
billion in 2023.
All of this is evident of how, these
days, global dominance is largely being
fought through the tech sector.
It's been more than 4 years since the
Taliban reassumed control of
Afghanistan, but this year, Russia
became the first country to officially
recognize them as the country's
government. In an effort to encourage
diplomatic ties, the Taliban have tried
to present a more moderate stance,
curbing things like opium production,
but their oppressive policies towards
women, which ban them from most
education, work, and public places, have
repelled most of the world. The
acknowledgement from Russia opened the
door for opportunistic cooperation on
trade and energy production.
Since the Taliban took over power in
Afghanistan, attacks by Tehrik-i-Taliban
have significantly increased in
neighboring Pakistan. The Taliban
government denies involvement, but it's
widely believed the TTP receives funding
from them and that its fighters train in
Afghanistan. This ensuing conflict
escalated in the fall with the countries
exchanging air strikes and fire,
resulting in dozens of deaths and
injuries. And though a ceasefire was
negotiated, it's tenuous because the
underlying reason, Taliban committing
violence in Pakistan, remains.
The world's most polluted city, Delhi,
India, tested out cloud seeding as a way
to eliminate from its hazy skies for the
first time in more than five decades.
Seeding uses aircraft and drones to
release silver iodide into the
atmosphere, which acts like ice and
builds clusters of water droplets that
increase rainfall, something that in
turn captures pollutants as it comes
down. But in this test case, there
wasn't enough moisture in the air to
make rain. Officials will try again, but
critics are wary of a band-aid approach
to the problem instead of addressing the
root cause, which is centered on a
combination of crop burning, factories,
[music] and heavy traffic.
As India tries to strengthen its
presence in the Indian Ocean, a region
fiercely contested due to China's
ambitions to control its seas and
shipping routes, it extended a $565
million line of credit to the Maldives,
which is a cash-strapped but
strategically critical partner to India.
The step enhances the two countries'
ties, despite Maldives President Mohamed
Muizzu previously expressing a
preference and strategy that would be
viewed as pro-China.
A nationwide power outage in Sri Lanka
that left the island of 22 million
people without electricity wasn't found
to be caused by infrastructure failure,
it was a monkey's fault. The animal
climbed a power station and caused
enough damage to affect the entire
country, something that highlights two
problems that Sri Lanka has, an enormous
monkey population with estimates around
2 to 3 million, and a vulnerable and
aging energy grid that can be brought
down by one small [music] creature.
Tens of thousands of Gen Z protesters
took to the streets of Nepal this year,
initially in response to perceived
censorship by the government on social
media apps, and their uprising worked
surprisingly well, ousting the prime
minister in just days. One consequence
was the appointment of the country's
first female prime minister, Sushila
Karki, who will lead the interim
government until new elections take
place in 2026. Karki was Nepal's former
chief justice and is seen as a critic of
the corruption that many, including the
wave of Gen Z activists, saw creeping
into their government.
Tourism in Bhutan continues to see
double-digit growth, drawing largely
from India and America for its visitor
base. To meet this demand, the
government instituted a tourism
registration system that streamlines
hotel check-ins and makes sure that
guests stay at valid properties, while
also collecting data from visitors and
providers in order to manage the growth
of the industry in an effort to keep it
sustainable and secure. Upstream from
Bangladesh, China started construction
on the world's largest mega dam, a $124
billion project that will consist of
five cascade hydropower stations and
produce an estimated 300 million
megawatt hours of electricity. The
problem from Bangladesh, however, is
that the dam is being built on the
Yarlung Tsangpo River, and residents are
concerned that the dam could impact
millions of users downstream, where
residents rely on the river for
sustenance and agriculture. Bangladesh
and India have also raised concerns that
upstream water control could be
weaponized by China.
Bangladesh's shared border with Myanmar
has been an escape route for Rohingya
refugees fleeing the civil war there,
which is stretching into its fourth
year. Since 2017, Bangladesh has hosted
more than 1 million Rohingya, but the
government is now turning them back to
Myanmar, a country that stripped the
Muslim Muslim ethnic minority of their
citizenship more than 40 years ago and
continues genocidal violence, according
to the United Nations. Without papers
and authority to cross borders, it
leaves the Rohingya in a dire situation.
Thailand elected its third prime
minister in 3 years, naming business
tycoon Anutin Charnvirakul to lead the
country. And though Charnvirakul might
come across as casual with his
pro-cannabis [music] stance and
karaoke-singing ways, he's a shrewd and
conservative leader who swings the
country's trajectory away from the
populist direction it was headed.
Although he'll have to do it with his
hands tied as supporting parties have
demanded he hold another election for
representative seats shortly after
taking office.
Tensions between Thailand and Cambodia
over their 500-mile border escalated
this year, reaching a peak with a 5-day
armed conflict in the summer. Although
they signed a tenuous ceasefire, peace
negotiations have stalled as flare-ups
and accusations continue to fly between
the two countries. Both continue to
place restrictions on each other as
well, limiting certain items they
typically trade like fruits and
vegetables, as well as reducing access
to the internet and shortening visa
stays.
China's continual expansion of energy
development and its impacts on other
countries also stretches into Laos,
where it's built the largest onshore
wind farm in Southeast Asia, featuring
133 turbines for nearly $1 billion. The
Monsoon The Monsoon Wind Power Project,
built by PowerChina and run by a Thai
consortium, doesn't actually deliver any
power to Laos, but instead ships it
across the border to Vietnam, another
example of how one of the planet's
biggest greenhouse gas emitters exploits
the resources of neighboring countries.
Low birth rates and their potential
impacts on populations and economies is
a problem that countries are facing in
different ways. In Vietnam, the
government is reversing a decades-old
policy that limited families to two
children in hopes of bringing that
average birth rate back above two
children per woman. Additionally, the
government has gone as far as to offer
financial incentives for having more
children before 35 and for shortening
the time between births, all in an
effort to stave off the effects that
declining populations have on long-term
economic prospects.
Moscow residents looking to get away can
now fly 8 hours nonstop to North Korea,
signifying a deepening tie between the
two countries.
>> [music]
>> The pair already share defense pact and
cooperate in military operations as
North Korea has sent troops and weapons
[music] to Russia for its war in
Ukraine. The monthly Moscow-Pyongyang
flight is operated by North Wind
Airways, which previously focused on
flights to vacation destinations before
the EU's [music] airspace ban hampered
its operations. Conventional tourism is
still banned in North Korea, but groups
of Russians and other foreigners have
been allowed to trickle in as it opens
its border. Most notably seen in the
debut of a East Coast beach resort
expected to draw some 20,000 people.
The birth rate in South Korea is dismal
at just 0.74 births per woman, but even
that low number is an improvement on
0.72 in 2023 and marks the sharpest
percentage increase since the early
'90s. That's primarily thanks to policy
initiatives, including baby bonuses and
cash rewards. Seoul alone spent more
than $270 billion over the past 16 years
on childbirth incentives. [music] And
yet, even with that huge investment,
officials still think it's not enough to
stave off a precipitous population
decline.
Rice is a food staple in Japan, but
depleted crops due to heat wave and
increased consumption from tourists,
paired with panic buying ahead of
weather events, has increased prices so
drastically in the country that it's
looking to South Korea for cheaper
imports. South Korea will export rice to
Japan for the first time since 1999,
marking an economic and cultural shift
for the country, which previously
snubbed foreign rice imports as
inferior.
Maritime confrontations between the
Philippines and China continually take
place in the South China Sea over
contested waters, but in a more
aggressive incident this year, two
Chinese ships accidentally collided
during a chase of a Philippine patrol
boat, and the United States deployed two
of its own warships to demonstrate
support [music] for its Philippines
ally. Surrounding countries are fighting
over fishing, economic zones, and
disputed waters in the area, and though
US patrols regularly pass through, the
appearance in reaction to Chinese
aggression does raise the temperature.
The South Pacific is home to rich
habitat and diverse ecosystems, where
populations of orangutans, one of the
most genetically similar primates to
humans, used [music] to thrive. Today,
however, wide swaths of forest are being
cleared in Indonesia specifically to
harvest meranti, a wood specialized to
the area that's lightweight, moisture
resilient, flexible, and used primarily
in American motorhomes and recreational
vehicles. This year, scientists in
Indonesia and Malaysia released a study
about orangutans who were relocated when
forests were cleared for logging,
[music] and in nearly 1/3 of the cases
tracked, those animals attempted to
return home after translocation.
Singapore held its first parliamentary
election in 5 years, and though some
speculated that the opposition party was
gaining momentum, citizens re-emphasized
their contentment with the status quo by
keeping the People's Action Party in
charge.
>> [music]
>> The party experienced near record-low
turnout in 2020, but this year's results
extend their six-decade reign in
politics, choosing what some call
stability in a time when the country is
dealing with global trade disruptions.
Home to the world's second-largest port,
Singapore is disproportionately exposed
to fluctuations in international trade,
so minimizing those impacts is key to
the People's Action Party's success.
Despite widespread economic sanctions,
Russia continues to search for markets
for its exports, and one of those is
Brunei. [music]
The small country on the South China Sea
received its first shipment of Russian
oil through the Northern Sea Route.
Previously, the Arctic route had been
limited to shipping to China, but this
extension is the result of a deliberate
push by Russia to market the NSR route,
which links the country's western ports
to Asia during the summer and fall and
cut shipping time by 10 days in
bypassing the Suez Canal.
Russia's diplomatic relationship with
Brunei is key for the country as it
tries to maintain a presence in the
ASEAN, or Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, region. The group is a block of
regional countries that are unified in
economic and security interests, and in
2025, East Timor became the 11th country
to join. East Timor, which was ruled by
Portugal for three centuries, only
achieved independence in 2002, [music]
so its entry into ASEAN was seen as a
momentous next step for the small
country in trying to achieve stability.
Sydney, Australia's new airport, saw its
first jet flight this year as it nears
its opening date for passengers in late
2026. Brand new airports of this scale
are rarely built these days, making the
opening significant. [music] The
facility is expected to one day rival
London's Heathrow Airport in terms of
passenger capacity. Sydney's current
airport, the primary gateway country, is
stretched to capacity and hampered by
its 11:00 p.m. curfew, but this new
Western Sydney Airport will operate 24
hours a day thanks to its more rural
location. The ruling right-wing
coalition in New Zealand voted to
reverse the government's ban on offshore
oil and gas exploration. The country has
a significant cost of living crisis that
high energy prices and shortages have
contributed to, and although the
reversal is being portrayed as in
response to these difficulties, it
simultaneously takes New Zealand off its
trajectory towards carbon neutrality.
Furthermore, the coalition plans to
boost mineral exports to $3 billion by
2035 and cut funding to conservation and
climate initiatives. In a deal that's as
official as becoming blood brothers, the
largest and most populous South Pacific
nation, Papua New Guinea, signed a
defense treaty with Australia, inking
the declaration that they have each
other's backs. The alliance, years in
the making, means Australia can rely on
Papua New Guinea for access to the
island nation's military infrastructure,
while Papua New Guinea can rely on its
larger neighbor for security and
deterrence. The [music] move comes as
China continues to expand its presence
and power in the region, and this pact
is the most recent attempt for the West
to counter that spreading influence.
Palau is ground zero for the
consequences of climate change, but this
year it made news for another reason. It
rejected a proposal from the United
States to send asylum seekers to the
tiny island [music] nation. As America
ramps up its anti-immigration efforts
and looks to send people away, it
offered Palau up to $100,000 per
deportee for a total of $7.5 million to
accept 75 people. But despite the money
and deep relationship with the US,
officials on the island said it was not
worth the cost and potential security
concerns, leaving America to look to
other countries. After several years of
delay, the Federated States of
Micronesia are now linked
technologically. A 140-mile, $95 million
undersea cable now connects several
Micronesian islands, including Pohnpei,
its largest, to an existing cable linked
to Guam. [music] The fiber optic East
Micronesia cable, a joint venture by
Japan, the United States, and Australia,
will benefit some 100,000 people in the
Oceanic area by bringing cheaper, faster
internet and communications. [music]
Six years after a Hong Kong-owned ship
ran aground on coral east of Rennell
Island in the Solomon Islands, damaging
the reef and lagoon, killing wildlife,
and contaminating drinking water, the
landowners and government are finally
seeking justice. They're suing a handful
of companies potentially liable for
damage caused by the spill, as up until
this point nothing more than an apology
had been issued despite widespread
damage and assumed long-term health
consequences. The first members of
what's known as the NYZ cohort, a group
of hundreds of long-term immigrant
detainees in Australia, were sent to
Nauru as part of a 30-year, $2.5 billion
deal. The group were immigrants to
Australia who had been convicted of
crimes, served their sentences, but then
had their visas revoked due to their
crimes. While most in this situation
would be deported, this cohort couldn't
be for various reasons like lacking
identity documents, refusal by their
home country, or refugee status, meaning
they were stuck in legal limbo. The High
Court in Australia ruled they couldn't
be held indefinitely in immigration
detention if they had no viable path to
deportation, so Australia struck a deal
with Nauru to transfer them there with
long-term visas. The ruling and
subsequent agreement with Nauru was
shrouded in some levels of secrecy and
criticized by human rights groups.
Australia, on the other hand, is
welcoming residents of Tuvalu with an
offer of climate visas. The tiny nation,
comprising nine islands that span just
10 square miles, is increasingly
succumbing to the effects of climate
change as its waters rise and affect
infrastructure and drinking water.
Australia offered a first-of-its-kind
live-in-work climate change visa to
Tuvalu residents, and more than half the
country of 10,000 people have already
applied.
Geography constrains the super-skinny
Marshall Islands, meaning it has little
ability to field a soccer team, mostly
due to its lack of pitch space and
general interest. But in 2025, [music]
it became the last country in the world
to put together a national team and play
its first match. Never mind that the
game took place 6,200 miles away in
Arkansas, where the largest population
of Marshall Island expatriates live, the
Marshallese were thrilled to finally
play an 11-a-side game after dedicating
years to its creation, even if they lost
0 to 4 to the US Virgin Islands.
Vanuatu offers a golden passport program
where foreigners can spend about
$130,000
to purchase citizenship to the island
nation. Criticisms of the program,
however, arose in cases like Andrew
Tate's. He was arrested in 2022 for
human trafficking and rape in Romania
and purchased the citizenship around the
same time, highlighting the appeal of
the program to criminals looking to
escape authorities.
>> [music]
>> Despite still being under investigation,
this year Vanuatu said it would not
revoke his citizenship. As heavy, more
intense rainfall on Pacific island
countries of Fiji, Samoa, and Tonga
increases, so too do cases of dengue
fever. The potentially deadly viral
illness is spread by Aedes mosquitoes,
which flourish in humid, hot, moist
environments, [music]
the kind that are proliferating in these
low-lying countries. The dramatic rise
in cases this year pushes them to the
highest infection level in more than a
decade despite intense efforts to fight
mosquitoes, and several of the nations
declared a medical emergency.
The Pacific region is home to
unquantifiable potential for deep-sea
mining of critical minerals used in
computer chips, and there is an
international race to lead this charge.
Nations here are approaching it
differently, with some hesitant to
exploit a natural resource for quick
gain, but others, like Kiribati, are
increasingly headed towards inking
deals. This year it announced a
potential partnership with China to
commercially mine Kiribati's economic
exclusion zone, which is one of the
largest in the Pacific.
Antarctica is the only continent without
a government, instead loosely overseen
by a 54-nation treaty that's been in
place since 1959. [music]
There are, however, seven countries that
lay some territorial claim to
Antarctica, and the trip that Gabriel
Boric, president of Chile, took to the
South Pole this year was to remind the
world that his country is one of those
with deeper interests in the continent.
He's the first Latin American leader to
make the trip, marking a significant
milestone as he pushes for expansion of
Chilean research stations [music]
further south.
A global treasure hunt for a stolen
painting that was taken by the Nazis
from a Jewish art dealer in Amsterdam
during World War II came to an end in
Argentina. Officials have been looking
for Portrait of a Lady for decades, but
it was a reporter for the Dutch
newspaper AD who uncovered that it was
hanging in the home of Frederik and
Patricia Kedgian. The reporter had been
sleuthing online and found the portrait
in a photo in a real estate listing of
the Kedgians. Patricia is the daughter
of a Nazi financier, so it was suspected
that she may have the piece. The world's
largest electric ship started operations
with regular ferry crossings from Buenos
Aires to Uruguay. Manufactured by
Tasmanian-based Incat, [music] the ship
features 250 tons of batteries and
capacity for 40 megawatt hours of
electricity, which will power it to
carry more than 2,000 passengers and 225
cars on its 1-hour journey to
Montevideo. Shipping, which accounts for
3% of the world's greenhouse gases, is
increasingly looking to transition to
cleaner systems, [music]
and this protected and contained use
case will help manufacturers as they
continue to develop new technology.
Brazilian officials have plans to build
a 600-mile, 1,000-km railway to
transport corn and soybeans from the
rainforest to tributary of the Amazon
River, where it can then be ferried to
boats headed abroad. But the railway
must first clear hurdles, the first of
which is a redesignation of the national
park's border, and the second, large
amounts of public outcry, including
protesters who gathered at this year's
United Nations climate summit. They are
opposed to the deforestation the project
would create, although proponents say
each 170-car train could replace 422
trucks, which often result in spills and
longer transport times over the varied
terrain.
Paraguayan President Santiago Peña made
international sport part of his
candidacy, and it paid off. It was
announced that the country would be the
host of the 2031 Pan American Games, the
first time Paraguay will host the event.
The Pan American Games act as a warm-up
to the Summer Olympics across the
Americas and ranks as the third largest
multi-sport event in the world, so the
naming of Paraguay as a host elevates
the country on the global scale, putting
it in the same category as previous host
countries like Peru and Chile.
The people of Bolivia elected Rodrigo
Paz as their new president, marking the
end of a 20-year reign by the Movement
for Socialism party. Paz, a center-right
politician, won as the country deals
with soaring inflation and high cost of
food and fuel, and he was able to
capitalize on internal fighting within
the MAS party. Though Paz pitched
himself as an outsider, he is the son of
former Bolivian president Jaime Paz
Zamora, who led from 1989 to 1993, and
his election is representative of a
broader regional political swing towards
the right in recent years.
The Amazon rainforest stretches into
nine South American countries, but in
Peru, where it occupies more than 10% of
the land, conflict between modern
development and indigenous groups
continues and reached an alarming high
this year. That's because the Mashco
Piro group, which remains one of the
area's last uncontacted tribes, was
recently aerially photographed visiting
another neighboring tribe, a behavior
that experts consider quite abnormal and
likely in response to increasing
pressure on the Mashco Piro's land from
a nearby logging company who is clearing
forest around them.
Leaders in Ecuador, Colombia, and
Venezuela all made news. Ecuadorian
President Daniel Noboa survived what
some are calling an assassination
attempt by protesters who pummeled his
motorcade with stones in reaction to his
policy raising diesel prices in order to
offset increased government spending.
Previously, Ecuador had been a
relatively safe country, but it's seen a
[music] surge in violence in recent
years, in part due to its position
between Peru and Colombia. Colombia has
long been recognized as a central hub
for drug production and trafficking, and
this year President Gustavo Petro made a
pitch to the United Nations to remove
the coca leaf from its list of harmful
substances. The coca leaf is the main
ingredient in cocaine, and Colombian
officials are arguing that the US-led
war on drugs is ineffective. Instead,
they say the coca leaf should be
legalized due to its additional
therapeutic properties. And finally,
President Nicolas Maduro remained
isolated and under international
sanctions. But in 2024, he met with
former UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson,
and this year it was discovered that
Johnson was allegedly paid $325,000
for that meeting. This interaction and
the revelation of payment raised a lot
of global eyebrows, given that it's
likely an avenue for back-channel
diplomacy to a country widely regarded
as off-limits.
Venezuela has long been a major oil
producer, but even if that industry
shrank recently, its next-door neighbors
Guyana and Suriname have been taking
notes. For years, offshore oil
exploration only led to minor
discoveries, but in recent years, that
changed. Now, an acquisition by Chevron
of Houston-based Hess allows a $53
billion drilling project in Guyana's
waters to move forward. Chevron and
Exxon had been battling over Hess's
shares in the joint project, and the
settling of [music] the dispute means
they can now expand further in one of
the most promising new production fields
in the world. [music]
Off the coast of Suriname, large
deposits have also been discovered, and
the country, one of the poorest, is
expected to begin production by 2028.
Residents there elected their first
female president this year, and they're
looking to her with hope in leading this
next chapter. One that's ultimately
dependent on fossil fuels, but has the
potential to lead them out of poverty.
The US has been heavily involved in
Panama as of late, and in the country's
western edge, home to the nation's
banana plantations, it's been no
different. Following pension reform on
the part of the Panamanian government,
labor unrest boiled over with protests,
looting, and even the burning of a local
baseball stadium in the country's banana
belt. This was then continued into a
strike. In response, the US-based
Chiquita decided to take a hard-line
stance, proactively firing all day
laborers who left their plantation work,
a number estimated at around 5,000
total.
In Costa Rica, things are generally
looking up. In a country that's proudly
invested in its people's well-being,
opting to fund education and forest
conservation over a military, the nation
reached its highest ever ranking in the
World Happiness Index this year by
coming in at sixth. [music]
That makes it the highest ranking in the
Americas, and globally sitting just
behind the Netherlands and the
traditionally high-ranking Scandinavian
countries. But this ranking hasn't made
Costa Rica immune to broader regional
strife. In June, Roberto Samcam, a
former Nicaraguan army officer, was shot
and killed in San Jose, Costa Rica, in
what seemed to be a politically
motivated attack. An outspoken critic of
Nicaragua's increasingly authoritarian
regime led by President Daniel Ortega,
Samcam is the second activist to have
been attacked abroad while more and more
Nicaraguans of all sorts have continued
to flee the country.
>> [music]
>> International movement of a very
different sort is the theme for a
scientific experiment taken on by a host
of researchers from Florida and
Honduras. Two years after a major coral
bleaching event off the coast of Miami,
local scientists have now begun to
transplant elkhorn coral from Honduras
to revitalize the reef. It's a strategy
that's worked in other cases, and one
that may help Florida's reefs going
forward as they're pulling coral that's
used to a higher average temperature
from warmer Honduran waters.
In El Salvador, the national crackdown
on bad behavior that's captured the
world's attention has officially
trickled down into the schools.
Recently, the Bukele government handed
over the state's education system to a
military officer with no background in
education. The result has been a
crackdown on loose adherence to school
uniforms and the implementation of a
high and tight haircut policy that has
critics labeling the moves as further
small steps towards a more nationalistic
and authoritarian regime.
It's hard to argue that there's ever
been a year where the movement of people
between the US and Guatemala has been so
hotly contested. In August, this
relationship brought forward its oddest
chapter yet with the discovery of the
presence of the new world screwworm in
Maryland. Brought north from Guatemala
by an unknown person, this worm is a
parasite that can devastate a cow
population untreated, so much so that
the US Department of Agriculture spends
millions yearly spreading sterilized
males throughout Central America to stop
their spread. Though, in this case, the
CDC ultimately wasn't too particularly
concerned by the isolated incident.
In Belize, bank notes got an important
facelift this year. Removing Queen
Elizabeth from the paper money, the
country opted to celebrate its
post-colonial history with the face of
the country's first prime minister and
that of the founder of one of the
country's main political parties. Beyond
imagery, the notes needed an upgrade for
increased security features and general
durability.
2025 has tested the strength of the
relationship between Trinidad and Tobago
and the UK. With the former being a
Commonwealth country, its citizens have
for years enjoyed relative ease of
travel to the UK, requiring no visa. But
with asylum seekers from Trinidad and
Tobago up to all-time highs, the UK has
now begun to require a visa for visitors
from the country, making it one of three
Commonwealth nations requiring such
paperwork to visit. One of the others
required to register such paperwork is
Dominica, which this year made its own
news with the country's largest drug
bust on record. Seizing 3,800 lb or
1,700 kg of cocaine, numerous firearms,
thousands of dollars of cash, and making
24 arrests, the bust marks a major win
for the tiny nation's [music] efforts to
snuff out organized crime.
Grenada, another Commonwealth country in
the Caribbean, has recently upped the
pressure on British royalty for
reparation payments, fueled by recently
published research that King George the
IV, who ruled in the early 19th century,
received direct payments from two
Crown-owned plantations on the islands.
Grenada officials are using this finding
to further their claim that British
royalty directly benefited from slave
labor and ought to right a historical
wrong by paying for the damages.
An upstart air carrier took a major step
towards furthering the connections
across the region with the unveiling of
its new plane, the Spirit of Barbados.
For InterCaribbean Airways, the
unveiling of the ATR 42 is part of the
country's [music] expansion into
Barbados, more easily linking the island
with the rest of the Caribbean region.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines was one
of four Caribbean countries, along with
Barbados, Belize, and Dominica, that
signed an expanded free movement
agreement. Previously, citizens were
only allowed to travel between those
nations for work, but this loosened
restriction means they can move for
leisure now, too.
Saint Lucia made big progress in LGBTQ
rights this year. The nation's Supreme
Court found its buggery and gross
indecency laws that criminalized
consensual same-sex intercourse with up
to 10 years in prison to be
unconstitutional. It marks a major
victory for activists across the region
that are fighting anti-LGBTQ sentiments
in the courts, both literal and of
public opinion, where acceptance has
progressed very gradually.
Far from Eastern Europe, the global
implications of Russia's invasion of
Ukraine are still reverberating in
Antigua and Barbuda. In March, a judge
in New York issued subpoenas to access
the financial information in regard to
the sale of the Alpha Nero mega-yacht.
Formerly abandoned by a Russian
businessman when sanctions began to roll
out in 2022, the nation seized then sold
the mega-yacht. But now, the details of
the sale and who really is the rightful
owner of the yacht are being questioned
by lawyers representing the Russian
businessman's daughter. Such questions
carry weight when the yacht itself is
worth nearly 70 million dollars.
In Saint Kitts and Nevis, public
transportation had a rather
revolutionary 2025. The country of fewer
than 50,000 introduced two new buses.
Making it newsworthy is the fact that
they're electric buses, a proud addition
for a country that's made commitments to
sustainability and clean transit. The
buses were also gifted as Taiwan sent
them to the nation as an act of
goodwill, an effort to strengthen the
connection and flow of technological
goods between the two, as Saint Kitts is
one of the few countries in the world to
have formal diplomatic relations with
the contested Asian nation.
On the bisected island of Hispaniola,
the year began with what the Dominican
Republic president called a painful but
necessary decision to crack down on
Haitian migrants fleeing to the country.
Persistent gang violence has pushed
Haitians across the border in growing
numbers, putting a strain on Dominican
resources. The crackdown has played out
on the border with increased staffing
and fencing, as well as within hospitals
where proof of residence and IDs are now
required. In Haiti, this has resulted in
the return of more than 100 pregnant
women who the Dominican Republic
indiscriminately deported regardless of
the stage of their pregnancy. The
crackdown has garnered public
condemnation from NGOs around the globe.
Just west, Jamaica experienced a trying
2025 as well. What was a uniquely quiet
tropical storm year for the US was a
history maker there, as Jamaica's west
coast took the brunt of Hurricane
Melissa's force in October. Crashing
into the island as a Category 5 storm,
it was the worst hurricane the country
has ever endured, devastating tourism
infrastructure and farmland, both of
which the country heavily relies on.
Food has been an issue in Cuba, too.
With skyrocketing food prices coupled
with increasingly prevalent blackouts
and water shortages, Cubans have been on
edge.
>> [music]
>> An early summer hike in internet prices
seems to have been the final straw for
university students who initiated
coordinated attendance strikes. The
protest has been characterized as brave
while also respectful, as stepping too
far out of line and questioning the
party outright has the potential to
hinder a student's ability to graduate
or find a job down the line.
A year ago, the Bohemian government
struck a handshake deal with SpaceX.
[music]
SpaceX could land its rocket boosters in
its territory if the company provided it
with free Starlink internet services for
a variety of functions. But then this
year, SpaceX treated the Bahamas to an
unintentional air show with the dramatic
explosion of a rocket not far off its
coast. The accident threw local airlines
into momentary chaos and left debris all
over the island nation. In response, the
Bohemian officials are questioning
whether or not to allow SpaceX to land
boosters, while the company insists they
had a formal agreement in place.
In Mexico, 2025 has been a year defined
by trying to keep up with, counter, and
comprehend the unrelenting pressure
placed on it by its biggest and
increasingly volatile trade partner, the
United States. But when President
Sheinbaum announced in April that Mexico
was to immediately deliver millions of
cubic meters of water to Texas farmers,
it was in accordance with an agreement
made nearly 75 years ago. Sharing the
Rio Grande's water by terms defined
during World War II, Mexico is
struggling to meet its end of the
bargain as the region is gripped by
drought, leaving [music] Mexican and
Texan farmers alike scrambling for
water.
In the United States, 2025 saw the rise
of an American citizen to one of the
highest, most important positions in the
world. In May, Cardinal Robert Francis
Prevost, a 69-year-old man from Chicago
who studied at Villanova, was named Pope
Leo the 14th. Of 267 popes spanning
2,000 years, Pope Leo is the first to
hail from the US, a country which, from
the perspective of the Vatican, is
fairly young with a still maturing
Catholic [music] footprint.
Along Canada's west coast, the First
Nation Heiltsuk people ratified their
first constitution. The document, which
garnered popular support from much of
the 725 in the Heiltsuk Nation, serves
as an amelioration between western
systems of law and the group's long-held
traditional values and practices. It
also offers an alternative governmental
structure to the dated and maligned
Indian Act that's defined Canadian First
Nations relations for a century [music]
and a half.
We'll be back next week for the second
half of the stories you missed in 2025,
but before that, there's one more story
we'd like to bring to your attention.
This year, our team at Wendover shot and
produced a documentary series we're
really proud of. It's called Scav, and
it's available to stream through today's
video sponsor, Nebula. Scav traces the
dramatic unfolding of one of the oldest,
oddest, and largest annual scavenger
hunts across five fast-moving episodes.
And making this all possible, getting us
to Chicago, editing this down, hiring
enough production people to chase around
University of Chicago kids around the
clock, was Nebula, an independent
streaming service built by creators like
myself to help fund and platform
projects like Scav that require bigger
budgets or take on more creative risk
than we'd be willing to accept on this
platform. Scav is a Nebula original,
meaning it only exists on Nebula, but
even if you want to watch Wendover or
Jet Lag the Game earlier or without ads
or sponsorships, Nebula offers that,
too. And if you're looking to branch
out, the Nebula library is only getting
larger by the day. Another series I'd
recommend is Joe Scott's oldest and
newest places on Earth. The show blends
travel and science together in a really
creative way as Joe Scott is not just
talking about some of the most unique
geologic places in the world, but he's
actually visiting them, talking with
experts, navigating his way to remote
corners of the world, and exploring the
concept and meaning of time as he goes.
It's a really cool and novel show, so if
you'd like to support creators like
myself and Joe Scott expanding our
boundaries while gaining access to a
trove of ad-free and original work, give
Nebula a go. Follow the link in the
description below and get 50% off your
annual subscription through the end of
the year. Or, if you've neglected your
holiday shopping to this point, consider
a gift card where you can give someone
else a Nebula subscription for a month,
a year, or even a lifetime.